README.md, before:

# Personal Website

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/kujenga/website.svg?style=svg)][ci]

Built with [Hugo][hugo] and deployed on [Google App Engine][gae] via
[CircleCI][ci]. See it deployed at [ataylor.io](https://ataylor.io).

Directories are laid out as follows:
- `app` contains source code for the App Engine application.
  - `app/site/public` is where static assets from the Hugo site are built for
    embedding into the server binary and deployment within App Engine.
- `assets` is the Hugo assets directory for management via [pipes][hugoPipes].
- `content` is the Hugo directory for blog and other [page
  content][hugoContent], mirroring the organization of the site.
- `data` is the Hugo [data directory][hugoData] for various pieces of data such
  as external posts of interest.
- `layouts` is the Hugo directory for [templates][hugoTemplates], which have a
  very specific [lookup order][hugoLookup] determining which templates are used
  where. A few examples of these layouts are:
  - `layouts/index.html` is the homepage for the site.
  - `layouts/_default` contains default templates for when no specific template
    is defined.
  - `layouts/partials` contain reusable snippets for inclusion in other
    templates.
- `scripts` is a collection of utility scripts for working with the repo and
  things like deployment management.
- `static` contains [static files][hugoStatic] deployed as-is by Hugo.
- `tools` contains installation logic for the tooling needed for building this
  repo, in particular pinning an install of Hugo to the [desired
  version][hugoReleases].

## Development

To install dependencies, run the following commands:

```
npm install
```

```
cd tools
./install-tools
```

To run the application, perform the following commands:

```
npm run start
```

To run the tests, perform the following commands:

```
npm test
```

```
cd app
go test -v ./...
```

<!-- Citations -->
[hugo]: https://gohugo.io
[gae]: https://cloud.google.com/appengine
[ci]: https://circleci.com/gh/kujenga/website
[hugoPipes]: https://gohugo.io/hugo-pipes/introduction/
[hugoContent]: https://gohugo.io/content-management/organization/
[hugoData]: https://gohugo.io/templates/data-templates/
[hugoTemplates]: https://gohugo.io/templates/introduction/
[hugoLookup]: https://gohugo.io/templates/lookup-order/
[hugoStatic]: https://gohugo.io/content-management/static-files/
[hugoReleases]: https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo/releases

Commit message:

e2e: add basic puppeteer test against prod site
This adds the basic infrastructure for getting testing up and running against actual websites, the idea here being that we can leverage these to perform post-deployment validation on the deployed website.

README.md, after:

# Personal Website

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/kujenga/website.svg?style=svg)][ci]

Built with [Hugo][hugo] and deployed on [Google App Engine][gae] via
[CircleCI][ci]. See it deployed at [ataylor.io](https://ataylor.io).

Directories are laid out as follows:
- `app` contains source code for the App Engine application.
  - `app/site/public` is where static assets from the Hugo site are built for
    embedding into the server binary and deployment within App Engine.
- `assets` is the Hugo assets directory for management via [pipes][hugoPipes].
- `content` is the Hugo directory for blog and other [page
  content][hugoContent], mirroring the organization of the site.
- `data` is the Hugo [data directory][hugoData] for various pieces of data such
  as external posts of interest.
- `layouts` is the Hugo directory for [templates][hugoTemplates], which have a
  very specific [lookup order][hugoLookup] determining which templates are used
  where. A few examples of these layouts are:
  - `layouts/index.html` is the homepage for the site.
  - `layouts/_default` contains default templates for when no specific template
    is defined.
  - `layouts/partials` contain reusable snippets for inclusion in other
    templates.
- `scripts` is a collection of utility scripts for working with the repo and
  things like deployment management.
- `static` contains [static files][hugoStatic] deployed as-is by Hugo.
- `tools` contains installation logic for the tooling needed for building this
  repo, in particular pinning an install of Hugo to the [desired
  version][hugoReleases].

## Development

To install dependencies, run the following commands:

```
npm install
```

```
cd tools
./install-tools
```

To run the application, perform the following commands:

```
npm run start
```

To run the tests, perform the following commands:

```
npm test
```

```
cd app
go test -v ./...
```

To run the browser automation E2E tests, perform the following command:

```
npm run test:e2e
```

<!-- Citations -->
[hugo]: https://gohugo.io
[gae]: https://cloud.google.com/appengine
[ci]: https://circleci.com/gh/kujenga/website
[hugoPipes]: https://gohugo.io/hugo-pipes/introduction/
[hugoContent]: https://gohugo.io/content-management/organization/
[hugoData]: https://gohugo.io/templates/data-templates/
[hugoTemplates]: https://gohugo.io/templates/introduction/
[hugoLookup]: https://gohugo.io/templates/lookup-order/
[hugoStatic]: https://gohugo.io/content-management/static-files/
[hugoReleases]: https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo/releases
