content/_index.md, before:

+++
title = "Hi, I'm Aaron."
description = """
I love working with amazing people to build incredible products.
"""
+++

My work focuses on building software systems at the intersection of artificial
intelligence, information retrieval, and user experience.

Today I'm working to bring [Collaborative AI][eriProduct] to the
[Salesforce][salesforce] platform, building on the acquisition of
[Diffeo][diffeoWiki] in 2019. After attending Williams College I co-founded
[Meta Search][metaAcqNews] and Diffeo to help make sense of the world's
information.

I'm deeply interested in what we can do to carve a path out of the climate
crisis. When I'm not at my computer, you are likely to find me on a bike or rock
wall.


<!-- Links -->
[eriProduct]: https://www.salesforce.com/products/sales-cloud/tools/einstein-relationship-insights/
[salesforce]: https://www.salesforce.com/
[diffeoWiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffeo_(company)
[metaAcqNews]: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/diffeo-acquires-meta-search-launches-133000832.html
[williamsCS]: https://csci.williams.edu/
[williamsPOEC]: https://political-economy.williams.edu/
[williams]: https://www.williams.edu/

Commit message:

update homepage text for Additive work

content/_index.md, after:

+++
title = "Hi, I'm Aaron."
description = """
I love working with amazing people to build incredible products.
"""
+++

My work focuses on building software systems at the intersection of artificial
intelligence, information retrieval, and user experience.

Today I'm working on AI products for tax professionals as CTO at [Additive
AI](https://www.additive.ai/). My prior [work][eriProduct] at
[Salesforce][salesforce], [Diffeo][diffeoWiki], and [Meta Search][metaAcqNews]
has focused on building products to make sense of the world's information.

I'm deeply interested in what we can do to carve a path out of the climate
crisis. When I'm not at my computer, you are likely to find me on a bike or rock
wall.


<!-- Links -->
[eriProduct]: https://www.salesforce.com/products/sales-cloud/tools/einstein-relationship-insights/
[salesforce]: https://www.salesforce.com/
[diffeoWiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffeo_(company)
[metaAcqNews]: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/diffeo-acquires-meta-search-launches-133000832.html
[williamsCS]: https://csci.williams.edu/
[williamsPOEC]: https://political-economy.williams.edu/
[williams]: https://www.williams.edu/
