content/about.md, before:

+++
date = "2015-06-16T22:59:46-04:00"
title = "About"
description = "I've been building things all my life"

+++

Bringing Collaborative AI to the Salesforce platform, following on from the
acquisition of Diffeo by Salesforce in 2019. I co-founded Meta Search and Diffeo
to help make sense of the world's information. I've been building products and
leading engineering teams in startup and now enterprise environments since 2013.

## Experience

### Director, Software Engineering, [Salesforce](https://www.salesforce.com/)
#### November 2019 - Present
Bringing Collaborative AI to the Salesforce platform.

### VP Engineering and Co-Founder, [Diffeo](https://diffeo.com) <small>(Acquired by Salesforce)</small>
#### September 2016 - November 2019
Building search and discovery tools that use collaborative machine intelligence
to solve the challenges of disparate data. My focus is on expanding our platform
as a robust set of cloud services, providing the power of Diffeo on a broader
scale and building a data platform connecting the world's information.

### CTO and Co-Founder, [Meta](https://meta.sc) <small>(Acquired by Diffeo)</small>
#### January 2015 - September 2016
Developing a cloud platform that brings the power of a search engine to a user's
own files. Architecting a service-based backend to provide a single user
experience for file search and organization. It analyzes files with a similar
intent to how a search engine would analyze the web, providing SmartTags based
on found concepts and ideas.

### Head Developer and Co-Founder, [Peck](https://itunes.apple.com/tr/app/peck-social-calendaring-event/id912464190)
#### Fall 2013 - January 2015
Won the annual Williams College Business Plan Competition and hired a team of 5
to work out of [Lever](http://www.leverinc.org). Lead development of a mobile
app for iOS and Android with Ruby on Rails backend. Now live on the iOS App
Store. Peck is a social calendaring service for college students providing
information and event-based communication.

### Winter Intern, [New Signature](https://newsignature.com)
#### January 2014
Designed a system for knowledge management and intellectual property creation
for diagnostic, configurational, and procedural toolsets with goals of internal
efficiency and expanded services in the field of IT consulting.

### Filmmaker, [Berkshire Productions](http://berkshireproductions.com/)
#### 2007-2014
Founded a filmmaking and videography business with more than 160 jobs for over
40 clients, learning about marketing and content creation, and a wide variety of
cinema technologies, hardware, and software.

### iOS app development, Williams College Computer Science Department
#### Spring 2013 - Fall 2013
Created an app,
[HungryEph](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/hungryeph/id440288933), to provide a
simpler and more intuitive interface for daily and late night snack bar menus
that uses data scraped from the existing online dining resources. Currently in
use by Williams students.

## Projects

### Compiling Interpreter for x86 machine code written in ARM assembly language
Created the fastest interpreter in my Computer Architecture class by compiling
translated instructions of the x86 instruction set into mapped sequences of ARM
instructions allowing for much faster runtimes than a standard interpreter.

### Replicated Hosting within a P2P Marketplace
[Forked](https://github.com/kujenga/OpenBazaar) the
[OpenBazaar](https://github.com/OpenBazaar/OpenBazaar) project in its earliest
stages to emulate a hosted site environment within a P2P network. Used a
[Kademlia](http://xlattice.sourceforge.net/components/protocol/kademlia/specs.html)
distributed hash table to facilitate replicated storage of a user’s site across
multiple peers.

### Electric Powered Off-Road Vehicle
Hand-fabricated a full-suspension metal frame from raw steel tubing. Designed
the power train electronics system, used CAD software to design and fabricate
control board, motor mount, and drive train assembly.

## Education

### [Williams College](https://www.google.com/webhp?hl=en#hl=en&q=Williams+College) 2016'

#### Majoring in Computer Science
**Selected Coursework:** Distributed Systems, Data Mining, Computer
Architecture, Principles of Programming Languages, Mobile App Development, Intro
to Cryptography, Computer Graphics, Computer Vision

**TA:** Principles of Programming Languages (Spring 2015), Intro to Computer
Science (Fall 2013, Spring 2014)

#### Skills
**Computer Science:** Objective-C, Swift, Ruby, Java, C/C++, Python, Bash,
Assembly Language, Distributed Systems, iOS Development, Relational Databases

**Other Interests:** Metalworking and Fabrication, Woodworking, Piano (15
years), Williams Cycling Club, Williams Sailing Team, Williams Nordic Ski Club,
Hiking, Film

<script src="//platform.linkedin.com/in.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script type="IN/MemberProfile" data-id="https://www.linkedin.com/in/ataylor0123" data-format="inline"></script>

Commit message:

about: add profile pic, update description copy
The main goal here is adding a picture to my website, and the
new format made the original copy feel a bit stilted.

content/about.md, after:

+++
date = "2015-06-16T22:59:46-04:00"
title = "About"
subtitle = "I've been building things all my life"
description = """
Today, my work focuses on bringing collaborative AI to the Salesforce platform
by building AI capabilities and user experiences that harness information in
unstructured content. I joined Salesforce when Diffeo was acquired in November
2019.

I co-founded Diffeo and Meta Search with the goal of helping to make sense of
the world's information, leading our engineering teams to build a platform to
that end.
"""
profileImg = "images/me/hawaii-500px.jpeg"

+++


## Experience

### Director, Software Engineering, [Salesforce](https://www.salesforce.com/)
#### November 2019 - Present
Bringing Collaborative AI to the Salesforce platform.

### VP Engineering and Co-Founder, [Diffeo](https://diffeo.com) <small>(Acquired by Salesforce)</small>
#### September 2016 - November 2019
Building search and discovery tools that use collaborative machine intelligence
to solve the challenges of disparate data. My focus is on expanding our platform
as a robust set of cloud services, providing the power of Diffeo on a broader
scale and building a data platform connecting the world's information.

### CTO and Co-Founder, [Meta](https://meta.sc) <small>(Acquired by Diffeo)</small>
#### January 2015 - September 2016
Developing a cloud platform that brings the power of a search engine to a user's
own files. Architecting a service-based backend to provide a single user
experience for file search and organization. It analyzes files with a similar
intent to how a search engine would analyze the web, providing SmartTags based
on found concepts and ideas.

### Head Developer and Co-Founder, [Peck](https://itunes.apple.com/tr/app/peck-social-calendaring-event/id912464190)
#### Fall 2013 - January 2015
Won the annual Williams College Business Plan Competition and hired a team of 5
to work out of [Lever](http://www.leverinc.org). Lead development of a mobile
app for iOS and Android with Ruby on Rails backend. Now live on the iOS App
Store. Peck is a social calendaring service for college students providing
information and event-based communication.

### Winter Intern, [New Signature](https://newsignature.com)
#### January 2014
Designed a system for knowledge management and intellectual property creation
for diagnostic, configurational, and procedural toolsets with goals of internal
efficiency and expanded services in the field of IT consulting.

### Filmmaker, [Berkshire Productions](http://berkshireproductions.com/)
#### 2007-2014
Founded a filmmaking and videography business with more than 160 jobs for over
40 clients, learning about marketing and content creation, and a wide variety of
cinema technologies, hardware, and software.

### iOS app development, Williams College Computer Science Department
#### Spring 2013 - Fall 2013
Created an app,
[HungryEph](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/hungryeph/id440288933), to provide a
simpler and more intuitive interface for daily and late night snack bar menus
that uses data scraped from the existing online dining resources. Currently in
use by Williams students.

## Projects

### Compiling Interpreter for x86 machine code written in ARM assembly language
Created the fastest interpreter in my Computer Architecture class by compiling
translated instructions of the x86 instruction set into mapped sequences of ARM
instructions allowing for much faster runtimes than a standard interpreter.

### Replicated Hosting within a P2P Marketplace
[Forked](https://github.com/kujenga/OpenBazaar) the
[OpenBazaar](https://github.com/OpenBazaar/OpenBazaar) project in its earliest
stages to emulate a hosted site environment within a P2P network. Used a
[Kademlia](http://xlattice.sourceforge.net/components/protocol/kademlia/specs.html)
distributed hash table to facilitate replicated storage of a user’s site across
multiple peers.

### Electric Powered Off-Road Vehicle
Hand-fabricated a full-suspension metal frame from raw steel tubing. Designed
the power train electronics system, used CAD software to design and fabricate
control board, motor mount, and drive train assembly.

## Education

### [Williams College](https://www.google.com/webhp?hl=en#hl=en&q=Williams+College) 2016'

#### Majoring in Computer Science
**Selected Coursework:** Distributed Systems, Data Mining, Computer
Architecture, Principles of Programming Languages, Mobile App Development, Intro
to Cryptography, Computer Graphics, Computer Vision

**TA:** Principles of Programming Languages (Spring 2015), Intro to Computer
Science (Fall 2013, Spring 2014)

#### Skills
**Computer Science:** Objective-C, Swift, Ruby, Java, C/C++, Python, Bash,
Assembly Language, Distributed Systems, iOS Development, Relational Databases

**Other Interests:** Metalworking and Fabrication, Woodworking, Piano (15
years), Williams Cycling Club, Williams Sailing Team, Williams Nordic Ski Club,
Hiking, Film

<script src="//platform.linkedin.com/in.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script type="IN/MemberProfile" data-id="https://www.linkedin.com/in/ataylor0123" data-format="inline"></script>
